In organic chemistry, an alkane, or paraffin 
(a historical name that also has other meanings), 
is an acyclic saturated hydrocarbon. 
In other words, an alkane consists of hydrogen and carbon atoms arranged in a 
tree structure in which all the carbon–carbon bonds are single.
Alkanes have the general chemical formula CnH2n+2.

IUPAC defines alkanes as "acyclic branched or unbranched hydrocarbons 
having the general formula CnH2n+2, and therefore consisting entirely 
of hydrogen atoms and saturated carbon atoms". 

In an alkane, each carbon atom is sp3-hybridized with 4 sigma bonds 
(either C–C or C–H), and each hydrogen atom is joined to one of the 
carbon atoms (in a C–H bond). The longest series of linked carbon atoms 
in a molecule is known as its carbon skeleton or carbon backbone. The 
number of carbon atoms may be considered as the size of the alkane. 

Alkanes with more than three carbon atoms can be arranged in various ways, 
forming structural isomers. The simplest isomer of an alkane is the one in 
which the carbon atoms are arranged in a single chain with no branches. This 
isomer is sometimes called the n-isomer (n for "normal", although it is not 
necessarily the most common). However the chain of carbon atoms may also be 
branched at one or more points. The number of possible isomers increases rapidly 
with the number of carbon atoms.

Branched alkanes can be chiral. For example, 3-methylhexane and its higher 
homologues are chiral due to their stereogenic center at carbon atom number 3.

The IUPAC nomenclature (systematic way of naming compounds) for alkanes is based 
on identifying hydrocarbon chains. Unbranched, saturated hydrocarbon chains are 
named systematically with a Greek numerical prefix denoting the number of carbons 
and the suffix "-ane".

In 1866, August Wilhelm von Hofmann suggested systematizing nomenclature by using 
the whole sequence of vowels a, e, i, o and u to create suffixes -ane, -ene, -ine (or -yne),
 -one, -une, for the hydrocarbons CnH2n+2, CnH2n, CnH2n−2, CnH2n−4, CnH2n−6. Now, 
the first three name hydrocarbons with single, double and triple bonds; "-one" 
represents a ketone; "-ol" represents an alcohol or OH group; "-oxy-" means an ether and 
refers to oxygen between two carbons, so that methoxymethane is the IUPAC name for 
dimethyl ether.

 

